JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: two
reporters on
the ground in New York state on
the battle
for that next presidential
primary. We hear
the latest on the Republican and
the Democratic
races. Are Trump's and Clinton's
lead as solid
as they look?
Then: new hope in paralysis
research. A quadriplegic
man is given some of his
mobility back with
the use of microelectrodes and
muscle stimulation.
And training for the unthinkable
-- the people
prepared to launch nuclear
weapons, if given
the order.
1ST LT. KATHLEEN FOSTERLING,
U.S. Air Force:
It's hard to think about it
because you don't
know what is going to happen in
that situation.
You just have to do your job,
and whatever
the outcome is, it is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nearly 40,000
Verizon landline
and cable workers walked off the
job in nine
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nearly 40,000
Verizon landline
and cable workers walked off the
job in nine
Eastern states today. They went
on strike
eight months after their
contract expired,
and with little progress in
negotiations.
Workers in New York and
Philadelphia stood
in picket lines, protesting what
they said
were Verizon's attempts to
freeze pensions,
make layoffs easier, and rely
more on contract
workers.
MAN: The five people in charge
of our company
make $235 million. They want to
take away
from me. I have got to work 70
hours a week
to make ends meet. How is that
right? I get
paid a good salary. Forget about
the rest
of the world that doesn't get
paid as good
as we do. I don't know. Where
does it end?
When does it end?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Verizon said the
real issues
are health care costs and
contract provisions
that are out of date. The
company also said
it's trained thousands of
non-union workers
to fill in, so customers won't
be affected.
Confirmation came today that the
Zika virus,
spread by mosquitoes, does cause
microcephaly,
abnormally small heads in
babies. The U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
reported that existing evidence
also links
Zika to other severe brain
defects. It repeated
the standing advice to pregnant
women to avoid
traveling to areas where Zika is
spreading.
In war-torn Syria, the
government held parliamentary
elections today in the areas it
controls.
The voting took place as peace
talks resumed
in Geneva. But the Syrian
Foreign Ministry
ruled any talk of a government
without President
Bashar al-Assad.
Meanwhile, lawmakers in Iraq got
into a brawl
with as the political crisis
deepened. The
fighting broke out in a dispute
over how to
clean up corruption. Some
demanded the prime
minister sack his current
cabinet and bring
in technocrats.
There's been a new incident at
sea between
Russia and the U.S. Pentagon
officials say
Russian jets repeatedly buzzed a
U.S. Navy
destroyer in the Baltic Sea this
week, coming
as close as 30 feet. A Russian
helicopter
also made passes. Video from the
ship shows
a jet sweeping past in what
appeared to be
a simulated attack.
The White House today was
critical.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
This incident, as you won't be
surprised to
hear, is entirely inconsistent
with the professional
norms of militaries operating in
proximity
to each other in international
waters and
international airspace. And we
continue to
be concerned about this
behavior.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. Navy
says the destroyer
took no action in response. It
is latest in
a series of such incidents in
recent years.
New trouble erupted between
migrants and Macedonian
police along the Greek border.
At least 50
migrants tried to pull down
parts of razor-wire
fences at a closed crossing
that's become
a flash point. Macedonian police
fired tear
gas again to drive the crowd
back. About 11,000
people are stranded in a
makeshift tent city
on the Greek side of the border.
Voters in South Korea have dealt
a surprise
blow to their conservative
leader. Early results
indicate that President Park
Geun-hye's ruling
party lost their majority in
Parliament today.
The election took place as South
Korea faces
sagging growth, as well as North
Korean provocation.
The results threaten Park's
plans for her
final 20 months in office.
A Chinese court today threw out
the country's
first legal challenge to laws
against same-sex
marriages. The case was brought
by a gay couple
who'd been denied a marriage
license. Hundreds
of supporters gathered outside
the court in
Changsha, and greeted the couple
after the
court turned them down. Their
lawyer said
the fight will go on.
SHI FULONG, Attorney (through
translator):
Today is not the beginning and
definitely
not the end. The achievement of
every right
relies on the efforts of
everyone and is not
achieved overnight. I believe,
as long as
we try together, we will finally
realize the
rights of equality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Supporters say
they're heartened
that a Chinese court even agreed
to hear the
case and that state-controlled
news media
covered it.
Back in this country, a task
force in Chicago
charged police in that city have
abused minorities
for decades with excessive force
and a code
of silence. The panel was
established last
year after an outcry over the
shootings of
black suspects. In a scathing
report, the
group concluded that Chicago
police have -- quote
-- "no regard for the sanctity
of life when
it comes to people of color."
Five of the largest U.S. banks
have flunked
attempts to create so-called
living wills.
Federal regulators said today
that their plans
for surviving bankruptcy without
a taxpayer
bailout are -- quote -- "not
credible." J.P.
Morgan Chase, Bank of America,
Wells Fargo
and others have until October to
try again.
The nation's largest U.S. coal
mining company
filed today for federal
bankruptcy protection.
Peabody Energy, based in Saint
Louis, has
seen its stock value cut in half
in the past
year. It's being pressed by
cheap natural
gas and tougher environmental
regulations.
Several other major coal
companies have already
made bankruptcy filings.
And Wall Street surged again as
financial
stocks rebounded some. The Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 187 points to
close at 17908.
The Nasdaq rose 75 points, and
the S&P 500
added 20.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a tale of
two New Yorks, courting the
state's urban
and rural voters; a major
windfall for cancer
research courtesy of Facebook's
first president;
how science helped a
quadriplegic man move
his fingers; and much more.
First, the latest from the
presidential campaign.
It is less than a week to go
until voters
in New York state have their
say, and the
candidates hit the hustings
again today. A
major East Coast job action was
a main focus.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
It's a question of workers
standing up for
justice.
JOHN YANG: For the Democratic
hopefuls, it
was a day to embrace labor,
ahead of next
week's New York primary.
PROTESTERS: Bernie! Bernie!
Bernie!
JOHN YANG: Bernie Sanders joined
striking
Verizon workers in Brooklyn.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Today, you
are standing
up, not just for justice for
Verizon workers.
You are standing up for millions
of Americans
who don't have a union.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: You're
telling corporate
America they cannot have it all.
JOHN YANG: Hillary Clinton also
slammed Verizon,
saying in a statement: "The
company wants
to outsource more and more jobs.
Verizon should
do the right thing and return to
negotiations."
Clinton picked up the support of
an electrical
workers union in New York, while
Sanders snagged
the transit workers.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Thank you
so much for
your support.
JOHN YANG: The Vermont senator
also landed
his first endorsement from a
Senate colleague.
Oregon Democrat Jeff Merkley
announced his
backing in a New York Times
op-ed, and on
MSNBC, he explained why he broke
ranks with
40 Democratic senators backing
Clinton.
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY (D), Oregon:
This really
is all about the person who has
the boldest,
most fierce vision on the
biggest issues facing
America and the world.
JOHN YANG: Republican
front-runner Donald
Trump is stumping tonight in
Pittsburgh. But,
last night, the New York
billionaire appeared
in a CNN town hall, with wife
Melania joining
in.
ANDERSON COOPER, CNN: Melania,
do you ever
want to say to him, put the
mobile device
down, that, like, it's 2:00
a.m., and you're
still tweeting?
MELANIA TRUMP, Wife of Donald
Trump: Anderson,
if he would only listen. I did
many times.
(LAUGHTER)
MELANIA TRUMP: And I just say,
OK, do whatever
you want. He's an adult. He
knows the consequences.
And...
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN YANG: Trump also lashed out
again at
party rules that he says are
robbing him of
delegates. But Republican Party
chairman Reince
Priebus fired back on Twitter,
defending the
process and saying: "It's the
responsibility
of they campaigns to understand
it. Complaints
now? Give us all a break."
Trump's rivals, John Kasich and
Ted Cruz,
campaigned in Maryland and
Pennsylvania this
afternoon.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
I am here today with a word of
hope and encouragement.
All across Pennsylvania, all
across the this
country, people are waking up,
and help is
on the way!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. TED CRUZ: We're going to
seed manufacturing
jobs coming back to
Pennsylvania, the backbone
of the middle class.
JOHN YANG: Cruz has his own CNN
town hall
tonight.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's turn now to
the next
primary on the calendar.
On Tuesday, voters in the state
of New York
will head to the polls.
Joining us to talk about the
politics of the
Empire State, Beth Fouhy, a
senior editor
at MSNBC.com. She joins us from
New York City.
And from Albany, Karen DeWitt,
capital bureau
chief for New York state Public
Radio.
And we welcome both of you.
So, let's start with the
Republicans.
Beth, Fouhy to you, first. Break
it down a
little bit for us. Which voters
are eligible
to vote in the Republican
primary? How are
delegates selected in New York?
BETH FOUHY, Senior Editor,
MSNBC.Com: Well,
the only people who can vote in
the Republican
primary, Judy, are Republicans.
This is a
closed primary state, and that
presents challenges
and opportunities to both side.
In terms of just the overall
look at the Republican
field, Donald Trump is just
really dominating
here. He's, of course, from New
York. He's
the big alpha dog of New York,
and that that
status basically is propelling
him throughout
the state.
Most of the polling that we have
seen here,
the public polling, shows him at
or above
50 percent. He's beating Senator
Cruz and
John Kasich by as much as 30
points in all
this polling. So, right now, the
big mystery
is whether he can actually top
50 percent,
Trump, get all the statewide
unpledged delegates,
and get 50 percent in those
congressional
districts, where he could really
sweep up
a whole lot delegates.
There's a possibility, Judy,
that he could
actually get every single one of
the 95 delegates
in the state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as you said,
would have
to win over 50 percent of the
vote in order
to do that.
Karen DeWitt, to you. What about
-- do you
agree with the way Beth has laid
it out? And
is Trump stronger in one part of
the state
or another?
KAREN DEWITT, New York State
Public Radio:
Well, yes, Trump doesn't really
have a really
good get-out-the-vote effort or
ground game,
but sure here is drawing people
to the rallies.
And they have been huge, to use
his word.
A lot of people have been coming
to them.
He's been all over the state.
It's been very exciting, I
think, for New
York Republicans, as well as
Democrats. I
was talking to the New York
state Republican
Party chair, Ed Cox, and he
today, this is
New York's New Hampshire. We get
to meet these
people firsthand. It is really
energizing
everybody.
And, yes, I think Trump is
speaking to especially
Upstate New York. There is a lot
of discontent
about the economy. The Upstate
economy has
been doing terribly for decades.
And a lot
of people are upset. The
manufacturing jobs
aren't here anymore. He's
attracting mainly
the white, working middle-class
voters who
used to have good jobs, may not
have them,
are worried about their children
having to
leave the state.
And he does really seem to be
resonating a
lot more than Kasich and Cruz,
although the
way that the delegates are
selected, Kasich
and Cruz could win some
delegates, because
it's congressional district by
congressional
district, the way the race goes.
So they could pick up some
delegates, and
that's what they're hoping to
do. They know
-- probably know at this point
they can't
win.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Beth, when
Karen says Trump
doesn't have much of a
ground-level organization,
does that mean organization
doesn't matter
in New York?
BETH FOUHY: Well, he hasn't had
much of an
organization anywhere.
I mean, this really is one of
these candidacies
that, in the places that he's
won, has been
primarily the force of his
personality, the
force of his celebrity, this
real power and
connection that he has with
certain types
of voters in different states.
New York is even -- is all of
that and more.
I mean, New York is his home
state, although
it has changed quite a lot since
he was growing
up here. For example, he grow up
in Queens,
Judy. Queens is now probably the
most ethnically
diverse place in the entire
United States.
Flushing, New York, more
languages spoken
there than any other place in
the United States
and has more people who are of
an immigrant
background than any other place.
All the things that Trump talks
about, the
sort of pushing away illegal
immigrants, concern
about the borders, when he comes
back to his
home borough of Queens, he's
seeing American
diversity in all of its glory.
And that may
be a little bit troubling to
him, because
it's not quite the same place
that he grew
up in.
Still, he's very, very popular
almost everywhere
in New York, and can possibly
break through
and get that 50 percent in all
the congressional
districts and sweep the
delegates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fascinating.
Just quickly, Karen, so what
appeal is there
for, say, a Ted Cruz to make in
New York,
or a John Kasich, when Trump
seems to have
the advantage?
KAREN DEWITT: Well, I think Cruz
did make
a real mistake back in Iowa when
he discredited
New York City values. People
haven't forgotten
that.
New York Republicans are not
that conservative.
They're pretty moderate. So I
think Cruz has
a real challenge here. John
Kasich seems to
be going for more of the
electeds. He met
with the Senate Republicans,
trying to convince
them to maybe tell their friends
to vote for
him. He's trying to go the more
moderate route.
He's held a lot of town hall
meetings, which
he seems to excel in. So, they
are trying
chip away in particular
congressional districts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karen, staying
with you quickly,
turning to the Democrats, who
can vote in
the Democratic primary? And does
organization
matter for the Democrats?
KAREN DEWITT: Yes, it absolutely
does.
Of course, it is closed just to
Democrats.
But you have Hillary Clinton,
who has all
the established elected
officials, from Governor
Cuomo, all the way down to local
county legislators,
to Bernie Sanders, who has the
younger folks
who are very motivated to vote,
but the question
is, will they really come out on
Election
Day? Did they register early
enough?
Some of them may have to do
absentee ballot.
A lot of them are millennials,
and you would
have to use snail mail to do an
absentee ballot,
which they are not used to
doing. So, can
Sanders get as many voters out
as Hillary
Clinton likely can with her
support from the
major elected officials,
particularly in New
York City, and particularly with
her support
from the major party unions that
are supporting
her and will help with the
get-out-the-vote
effort?
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right.
There is such
a thing as snail mail, still.
So, Beth, how do you look at the
Clinton-Sanders
competition?
BETH FOUHY: Well, it's a little
bit closer
than the field on the Republican
side, Judy,
but so far, Clinton is quite a
ways ahead
of Bernie Sanders, and for many,
many reasons.
Let's not forget, she was a
senator from New
York for eight years. She was
elected in 2000,
reelected in 2006. She knows how
to run in
New York. She knows where to go.
She knows
the communities she needs to be
speaking to.
Plus, she was a pretty
well-regarded senator.
She paid as much attention to
the Upstate
issues as she did to the folks
in the city.
She was really, really
responsive around 9/11
and the needs of the
first-responders there,
but also Upstate dairy farms and
apple farms
and those big cities up there
that, as Karen
put it, have been struggling,
like the areas
around Syracuse, Rochester, that
kind of thing.
So, Bernie Sanders, even though
he's got his
thick Brooklyn accent, hasn't
lived in the
state for a long time and is not
super well-known.
He will get those college
students out if
they're registered and can vote,
eligible
to vote here as Democrats. He's
got a big
really tonight in Washington
Square Park in
Manhattan, where tons and tons
of young people
are expected to attend.
He's been going to a lot of
college towns
in New York, and there are
plenty of them
in this state. So he will get a
lot of enthusiasm,
that kind of enthusiasm that we
have seen
in other states. But he starts
really well
behind her because of her
experience and her
connections here in New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Karen,
there's no Brooklyn
advantage or no home state
advantage for Bernie
Sanders?
KAREN DEWITT: Well, I will say
one thing that
Sanders is trying to capitalize
on is the
so-called fractivists.
These are the anti-fracking
activities who
were successful in convincing
Governor Cuomo
to ban fracking in New York.
It's the only
state where it's illegal. And
he's hoping
that those voters will come out.
They gave
Cuomo a primary challenge,
supported Cuomo's
primary challenger back in 2014.
And his challenger, who, by the
way, was a
Vermont transplant, Zephyr
Teachout, actually
won a number of Upstate
counties. So, Bernie
Sanders this week said he's for
a nationwide
ban on fracking. He mentions it
in his speeches
here, and he's really trying to
play that
up, hoping he can get those
progressives out,
a small group, but very
motivated voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is a lot
of delegates
at stake, and we know the
candidates are working
the state hard. And we thank
both of you for
giving us this insight.
Beth Fouhy and Karen DeWitt,
thank you both.
BETH FOUHY: Thanks, Judy.
KAREN DEWITT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: A young tech
magnate places
a big bet on a different
approach to fighting
cancer.
Sean Parker made a name for
himself as the
co-founder of Napster and the
first president
of Facebook. The billionaire is
still actively
involved in the start-up world,
but he's now
dedicated a significant part of
his fortune
to medicine and fighting
disease.
Today, he announced a major
initiative, a
$250 million grant to help fund
research and
collaboration in immunotherapy
among six of
the country's leading medical
schools and
cancer centers. It's the largest
gift ever
of its kind.
And he joins me now from Los
Angeles.
Sean Parker, welcome.
So where does this passion, the
drive to do
something about cancer come
from?
SEAN PARKER, Founder, Parker
Institute for
Cancer Immunotherapy: Well, we
have all had
our own personal experience with
cancer.
Virtually no one is untouched by
cancer, whether
they have had the disease
themselves, one
of their loved ones has had it,
one of their
friends. You know, half of all
men and a third
of all women will have cancer in
their lifetime.
And what's -- what is especially
frustrating
is, despite all of these
advances in genomics
and understanding of the drivers
behind cancer,
progress over the last 20 years
just hasn't
been fast enough. And, as
somebody who has
spent his life as an
entrepreneur trying to
pursue kind of rapid, disruptive
changes,
I'm impatient.
And I think -- I think that
patients and their
families and doctors are
impatient as well.
And as I began to look at this
problem more
closely, it was clear that we
needed both
new technology platforms, like
immunotherapy,
but we also need to figure out
how to collaborate
and cooperate better within the
world of academic
science in order to really solve
the problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're zeroing
this money in
on immunotherapy. Why?
SEAN PARKER: So, immunotherapy
is an incredibly
promising technology.
It has a very long history going
back 100
years. In fact, it was believed
at one point
that cancer was caused by an
insufficiency
of the immune system. It turned
out that that
wasn't entirely false. Cancer is
kept in check
in the early stages by the
immune system.
The immune system is also an
incredibly powerful
weapon. It's really good at
recognizing cells
that have mutations, our cells
that are different,
look different.
And so it makes perfect sense
that we should
be able to harness the power of
the immune
system, which works with your
own body, in
order to target cancer and
destroy it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also in your
presentation
earlier today -- I was watching
-- you focus
on the inefficiency of the
current system
of cancer research, competing
centers, overlapping
laboratories, competition for
money, an unwillingness
to share information.
This is something you're really
baking in
to giving this money, isn't it?
SEAN PARKER: This is incredibly
important
to the Parker Institute, and I
think to the
next generation of research.
A field like immunotherapy is a
great example.
It's incredibly
interdisciplinary. And that
interdisciplinary nature means
that folks
from genomics, informatics,
immunology, and
oncology all need to figure out
how to work
together and share data, and
they also need
to be able to share the
breakthroughs that
they make without being
encumbered by bureaucracy
or issues around intellectual
property, because
it's going to be combinations of
therapies
coming together that are
successful in treating
the disease.
So, what we are able to do is
create a sort
of big sandbox that all these
scientists can
play in together. They have
access to the
best technology and they have
access to all
of each other's breakthroughs,
so that a breakthrough
that gets made at one center is
immediately
usable by scientists in another
center within
the network.
And the hope is that this is not
just a model
for how we can research cancer
immunology,
but it's also potentially a
model for how
we can do scientific research --
scientific
medical research in other
fields.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You are 36 years
old. As we
said, you're part of this new
generation of
tech -- people who have been
very successful
in the tech industry.
You have a much more hands-on
approach to
your philanthropy. How do you
ward against
being overconfident, of thinking
that more
is going to come out of this
than actually
will?
SEAN PARKER: I think, if
anything, we have
the opposite attitude. We accept
that, in
our philanthropic endeavors,
we're going to
fail, and we're going to have to
be honest
with ourselves that not
everything is going
to work.
That's one of the problems of
philanthropy
in general. Large philanthropies
and philanthropists,
they don't want to be told that
the gifts
that they're making didn't
achieve the results
in the world that they were
looking for, whereas,
in the business community, and
in particular
as an entrepreneur building
start-ups, you
have got to be willing to accept
failure.
It's a part of life. Not
everything is going
to succeed. And you have got to
be honest
with yourself about why
something didn't work.
If you can't diagnose the reason
why something
failed, you're not going to be
able to do
a better job at it in the
future. So, this
is a general principle that
we're trying to
apply, you know, from the world
of start-ups
in business to the world of
giving.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you have a
timeline in your
own mind, Sean Parker, in terms
of when you
expect to see results and, just
quickly, the
role of the federal government
in all this?
SEAN PARKER: The federal
government can be
a catalyst.
I think Cancer Moonshot, the
president and
vice president's Cancer Moonshot
effort has
come at an incredibly opportune
time, at this
point of convergence between the
computer
science world and the world of
life sciences,
and at an inflection point in
the development
of life sciences. So, that
catalytic role,
I think, is very helpful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sean Parker,
announcing today
the Parker Institute, we
certainly do wish
you well. Thank you.
SEAN PARKER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
men and women
with their fingers on the
triggers of the
U.S. nuclear arsenal; a kind of
ATM for clean
drinking water; and a French
chef explains
why you shouldn't always follow
the recipe.
But, first, another science
story, this one
looking at promising new
research in the treatment
of spinal cord injuries and
other causes of
paralysis.
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Five years ago,
as a college
freshman, Ian Burkhart dove into
a wave at
a North Carolina beach and broke
his neck
on the sandy ocean floor,
leaving him paralyzed
from the chest down.
Now, in a medical first, he has
regained some
movement in his hands and
fingers through
technology that communicates his
thoughts
directly to his hand muscles. It
uses a tiny
chip inserted in his brain and
an electronic
sleeve.
Burkhart has learned to perform
simple tasks,
even playing a guitar video
game.
IAN BURKHART, Spinal Injury
Victim: It is
just something that is so fluid.
It's just
kind of like it was before I had
my injury,
where I just think about what I
want to do,
and now I can do it.
JEFFREY BROWN: The work by
researchers at
Ohio State University and
Battelle Memorial
Institute is not a cure for
paralysis, and
Burkhart must be connected to
computers in
a lab in order to use his hands.
But it's
another big advance in the field
of neural
engineering.
And science correspondent Miles
O'Brien has
been following these
developments, and joins
me now.
Miles, this is essentially a new
way of getting
directly from the brain to the
hand?
MILES O'BRIEN: Exactly, Jeff.
Think of it
as a jumper cable. His brain is
fine. His
mysteries are still there. The
nerves are
intact, except for where the
injury is.
And if you can create a way to
bypass where
that injury is in the spinal
cord, you can
do wonderful things. At the core
of this is
significant development in
recent years in
understanding how our brains
work, and reading
the language of the brain,
interpreting it,
and, in short order, turning
that into action
which can lead to movement of
muscles. It's
nothing short of remarkable.
JEFFREY BROWN: So we're talking
about Ian
Burkhart is moving his hands by,
in a way,
thinking about it. But that
involves this
computer chip and training it to
interpret
his brain, in a sense.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes, it's not
unlike training
voice recognition.
Many of us are familiar with
that. What they
do is, they -- using advanced
MRI equipment,
they have him think about moving
what is missing,
or, in his case, what he's
unable to move
because it's paralyzed. And it
lights up certain
parts of the brain. You teach
the computer
to understand those patterns,
artificial intelligence,
pattern recognition.
And, eventually, it understands
what the brain
is telling it to do and can fire
electrodes
which will in turn move his
muscles.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And through this
electronic
sleeve, right?
Explain -- explain a little bit
more how it
moves, how it works.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, so, they
have got the
sensors embedded in his brain.
Wires come
out of his head, through a
computer, out of
the computer, another set of
wires to the
sleeve which is attached to his
paralyzed
hand. The sleeve has electrodes
in it which
engage the muscles themselves
and fire the
muscles.
They wanted to do it in a
noninvasive way.
Already, they were putting this
chip in his
brain, and so they wanted to
minimize the
invasiveness of this as they
performed this
experiment. Ultimately, as we
look toward
making this a practical solution
for those
who are paralyzed and giving
them more movement,
you would want to get into a
situation where
everything is embedded and,
through wireless
control potentially, embedded
electrodes in
the muscles themselves would
control the movement.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, because,
right now, it
can only be done in a lab,
right, with him
wired up?
MILES O'BRIEN: Exactly.
And what he's doing is pushing
technology
forward. He's a remarkable young
man. And
this is something that doesn't
really affect
his quality of life on a
day-to-day basis,
but it will affect others down
the road.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, a big step.
How hard is
it to get to that further goal,
and how big
a step would this be, do you
think?
MILES O'BRIEN: Not
insignificant.
A couple big things. First of
all, there's
a bandwidth issue. His brain is
generating
about a gigabyte of data every
three minutes,
so you have got a lot of data
that you have
to handle wirelessly, connecting
it from the
brain down to the limb that you
want to see
move.
And the other thing is, the body
correctly
identifies these implants as
foreign objects
and attacks them. And so, over
time, what
we have discovered in previous
experiments
with people who have had similar
implants,
they lose their efficacy because
the body
goes after them.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Miles,
I want to
switch gears. I want to ask you
about another
thing that broke this afternoon
that you have
been covering for us.
It's Zika. And, as you know,
late this afternoon,
the CDC concludes that Zika
causes microcephaly
and other birth defects. What's
the significance
there?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, this is
just kind of
dotting the I, crossing the T.
What the CDC did was, they did a
study of
the studies that exist and
concluded with
some finality that there is this
connection,
causation, we like to call it in
science,
between Zika and microcephaly.
Couple that
with the fact that CDC officials
are now talking
about possibly other birth
defects linked
to Zika, vision-related, an
M.S.-like disease,
premature births.
And then add to that the fact
that the spread
seems to be looming into perhaps
as many as
30 U.S. states, and, really, you
don't see
a lot of encouraging news
anywhere on the
Zika front. And the
administration, the CDC
is asking Congress for some
emergency funding
to try to nip this thing in the
bud, and now
would be the time to do that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, clearly some
new urgency
here, and clearly some attempts
to get funding,
which would do what exactly? Do
you know?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, the more
that they can
get out there and get public
education in
the mix, more studies to draw
these links,
more efforts to combat it, and
make people
aware, as much as anything, that
when a woman
is pregnant, in particular, that
being near
these particular mosquitoes,
this Aedes aegypti
mosquito, which is now spreading
into our
part of the world, can be a very
dangerous
thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
science correspondent
Miles O'Brien, thanks very much.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome,
Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Over the past
eight months,
we have aired three stories
about America's
aging nuclear arsenal.
Tonight, we thought we'd share
with you some
of the more interesting things
we learned
along the way.
John Yang has that.
JOHN YANG: Our past stories
looked at the
debate over rebuilding America's
nuclear submarines,
missiles and bombs, now that
much of the current
arsenal is reaching the end of
its service
life.
And, tonight, to continue our
unprecedented
look behind the scenes, we meet
some of the
men and women charged with this
great responsibility.
Veteran defense correspondent
Jamie McIntyre
reported these stories for us,
in partnership
with the Pulitzer Center on
Crisis Reporting.
MAN: All stations, all stations,
this is absentee,
absentee.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: If the president
ever gives
the order to unleash nuclear
weapons, the
men and women whose fingers are
on the triggers
would hear something like this.
MAN: Yankee, mike. Stand by,
uniform.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: It's the sound
of an emergency
action message. It's only a
drill, but in
a real-life situation, the
highly encrypted
message sent to bombers,
submarines and missile
crews would tell them which war
plan to execute
and which targets to destroy.
The coded message echoes,
because it's sent
by many different radios around
the world,
to ensure that even if the
nation were under
nuclear attack, at least one of
the messages
would get through.
The "NewsHour" was granted rare
access to
America's nuclear war fighters
over the past
six months. At Minot Air Force
base in North
Dakota, we spent the day with
the airmen who
load the B-52 bombers and the
crews that fly
them.
Chief Master Sergeant Lee Robins
is the wing
weapons manager.
How can you tell how old it is?
CHIEF MASTER SGT. LEE ROBINS,
U.S. Air Force:
It's pretty easy. So, there is
-- on the tail
number, if we look underneath
the letters
A.F., this is a 61, so that is
when it rolled
off the assembly line.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: That makes this
aircraft 19
years older than Major Luke
Dellenbach, a
B-52 commander and instructor
pilot.
I asked him about the
differences between
flying a conventional vs.
nuclear mission.
MAJ. LUKE DELLENBACH, U.S. Air
Force: For
a nuclear mission for us, it's
very controlled.
It's very scripted. The
president doesn't
want us doing things that we
want to do. There
is not inventiveness. It's very
much you follow
the rules and you follow the
procedures and
guidelines that we have.
For conventional, it's almost
the opposite.
We have a lot more flexibility.
We can be
more innovative. We can hit
targets different
ways.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: It's a sobering
mission, and
the venerable B-52 has been
updated with modern
avionics to carry it out, even
though, as
the crew is quick to show us,
some non-mission-critical
systems are an antiquated
reminder of its
Cold War history.
What do we have?
MAJ. C. RYAN COX, U.S. Air
Force: So, over
here, we have the oven. It has
two different
settings, off and 400 degrees.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: 1960s
technology?
MAJ. C. RYAN COX: It still works
today. And
up here, we have a sextant port
(INAUDIBLE)
navigation if everything else
fails.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: You know how to
use a sextant?
MAJ. C. RYAN COX: No. We usually
put a GPS
antenna out of it if we need it.
(LAUGHTER)
JAMIE MCINTYRE: While bombers
crews typically
fly at 50,000 feet above the
ground, the submariners
we visited last summer lurk
hundreds of feet
below the surface, in this case
plying the
depths of the Pacific Ocean.
MAN: Dive, dive.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: By far, the
stealthiest leg
of the nuclear triad, the
submarine's unofficial
motto is hide with pride.
The USS Pennsylvania's crew
spends three months
at a time in the cramped
confines of the windowless
ballistic missile submarine,
breathing recycled
air and never seeing the sun,
that is, unless
they are among the chosen few
who get to go
topside while the sub takes on
provisions,
an elaborate and highly
choreographed ritual
on the high seas in which canvas
bags of food
an supplies are transferred from
boat to boat.
While the subs patrol undersea,
missileers
serve underground. They have to
take an elevator
50 to 60 feet down each time
they arrive at
their jobs. There are 45 launch
facilities
spread across the America's
heartland controlling
the intercontinental ballistic
missiles, ICBM,
buried in silos in fixed, known
locations.
MAN: Incoming emergency action
message.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: We got to watch
two junior
officers practicing running
through the lengthy
checklist to launch nuclear
missiles.
To get the launch keys, they
must each unlock
a padlock. In this training
scenario, using
unfamiliar locks, a forgotten
combination
delays a mock launch. In case
you're wondering,
missileers can't just go rogue.
It takes four
officers, in two separate launch
facilities,
to launch a missile after an
authentication
code is received.
You can't help noticing how
young America's
nuclear warriors are. First
Lieutenant Kathleen
Fosterling who commands a
two-person missile
combat crew, is 27. She works a
24-hour shift
eight times a month, waiting for
an order
she hopes to never receive.
1ST LT. KATHLEEN FOSTERLING,
U.S. Air Force:
I wouldn't say it's lonely. Yes,
we only work
with technically one other
person, but we
have all the other guys topside.
We have -- we
talk to the other crews at the
other capsules
constantly.
But our free time, if we have
any, not always
-- sometimes, there is a lot --
sometimes,
there is not -- a lot of people
do homework.
There is a lot of people in
school. We read.
We watch TV. We watch movies,
hang out with
each other. It's not so bad.
(LAUGHTER)
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Do you ever
wonder, we ask,
what it would be like if she had
to turn the
launch key for real?
1ST LT. KATHLEEN FOSTERLING:
It's hard to
think about it, because you
don't know what
is going to happen in that
situation. You
just have to do your job. And
whatever the
outcome is, it is.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: First Lieutenant
Fosterling
is not alone. A number of
nuclear warriors
told us it's very hard to think
about what
it would be like after the
unthinkable happens.
JOHN YANG: Now Jamie McIntyre
joins us.
Jamie, this was really a
remarkable series.
You showed us things that we
rarely see on
television.
I have to ask you, what do you
take away from
this personally? What was most
memorable for
you?
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Well, you know,
John, one
of the things we asked almost
all the people
we interviewed was, have you
ever thought
about what would happen if you
actually had
to employ these weapons? It is
the classic
unthinkable scenario.
And what we found was that, yes,
most of them
had thought about it, but they
don't dwell
on it. These are military people
trained to
a mission and they think about
their part
of the mission, and there's not
a whole lot
of angst of what would happen if
they actually
were involved in an all-out
nuclear exchange.
It was interesting. When we
talked to the
submarine commander, we said,
well, how would
you deal with the crew after you
have already
launched all these missiles and
you know that
maybe even the end of the world
is coming?
And he said, well, it would be
difficult.
Hopefully, he said, there will
be some guidance.
JOHN YANG: A little guidance
from the Pentagon
on it.
And talk about that, because
this really is
-- they are handling the awesome
power of
nuclear weapons. But it's a job
for them.
It's their assignment. It's
their day-to-day
assignment.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Well, I
mentioned this in
the piece, that one of the
things that really
struck me was how young
everybody was, and
how they're focused on their
mission.
The young 1st lieutenant that we
met in the
missile silo, 1st Lieutenant
Kathleen Fosterling,
so she's very young and she's
commanding this
two-person crew, but yet -- and
she's in this
tiny room underground in a
windowless room
every day. And one of the things
that struck
you is that you had the -- you
see how they
personalize their life.
So, for instance, those locks --
and you saw
the sequence in the story where
the training
scenario, they can't get the
lock open because
they're using a training lock.
In real life,
they all use their own personal
padlocks.
And she had plastered hers with
Hello Kitty
stickers, which seemed to be
sort of this
juxtaposition of the fact that
they're -- they're
conducting this awesome mission,
but, at the
same time, it is a job, and they
just need
to have some sort of human
interaction and
think of it as something that
they just do
every day.
JOHN YANG: Just personalizing
their workspace.
Jamie McIntyre, remarkable
reporting. Thank
you very much.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: India has the
world's largest
number of people, about 76
million, without
access to clean drinking water.
And that's
according to a report the
international charity
WaterAid released last month.
As special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro
reports, an innovative solution
to that problem
is popping up across the
country.
His report is part of our
Breakthrough series.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The United
Nations estimates
that women in India spend a
collective 150
million workdays every year just
gathering
water, water that's increasingly
scarce and
polluted.
Now, in parts of the country,
including this
Delhi suburb, an experiment is
under way.
It's called a water ATM.
Customers purchase
credit on a prepaid card, scan
it at the tap,
and out comes water that's drawn
from the
ground and purified right at the
site, using
a technology called reverse
osmosis.
Amit Mishra manages the Delhi
facilities for
a social business called
Sarvajal, which hopes
to use reinvest profits it makes
to sustain
these outlets over the long
term.
This where the water gets
purified. It goes
into the large tanks here
storage?
AMIT MISHRA, Sarvajal: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: With
charitable grants
for the $30,000 of equipment and
land given
by the local government,
Sarvajal can charge
customers a fraction of the
price of commercially
bottled water, which most people
here cannot
afford.
Fetching water remains a mostly
female chore.
It's still self-service with
heavy lifting.
But it's a massive improvement
over what most
of Delhi's poorer neighborhoods
have.
WOMAN (through translator): By
12:00?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: We filmed
their ordeal
six years ago.
WOMAN (through translator): By
4:00.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The long
wait for a municipal
tanker truck that has no fixed
schedule, the
mad dash when it finally
arrives.
The city's middle class buys its
way out of
such chaos. Jyoti Sharme lives
in an apartment
that's hooked up to the city
water supply,
better off, but hardly well off.
JYOTI SHARME, India: We get
water 45 minutes
a day in the morning, and that's
it.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: From the
city?
JYOTI SHARME: Yes, into these
storage tanks.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She
described an elaborate
jury-rigged system of pumps or
motors homeowners
use to extract water from the
aging city pipes.
JYOTI SHARME: These are all
pipelines made
by the people themselves. And
these motors,
they actually create a suction
vacuum. So,
if there is no water in the
pipeline, any
crack in the pipe will allow
sewer or dirty
water to get into the pipelines.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And things
have hardly
improved for most people since
our 2010 visit.
K.H. PATIL, State Legislator: In
India, every
21 seconds, we lose a child.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: K.H. Patil
is a state
legislator and self-described
water activist
in the southern province of
Karnataka.
K.H. PATIL: Because of
contaminated water,
the health of our children is
really very
badly affected.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Across
India, it is contaminated
by industrial and agricultural
discharges
and poor to nonexistent sewage
treatment.
I have got two glasses from
either end of
the purification process. This
one has clean
water. This one has the raw
water that comes
out of the ground. They're
indistinguishable
to the naked eye, but Amit
Mishra here has
a meter to measure the total
dissolved solids,
and it's here that you really
see the difference.
So, let's do the clean water
first.
AMIT MISHRA: So, the clean water
says around
130 of total dissolved solids.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: One hundred
and 30, within
the World Health Organization
range for drinkable
water.
AMIT MISHRA: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: OK, and
let's go to the
contaminated water now, 1,912.
So, this is really like poison?
AMIT MISHRA: This is really like
poison.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And it's
what many people
consume: so-called raw water
drawn directly
from the ground, sometimes
bottled and sold
by unscrupulous, unregulated
operators.
AMIT MISHRA: For our uneducated,
there is
no difference between the clean
and the clear.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But among
those who have
literally gotten a taste of
clean water, there's
growing awareness of the health
benefits.
In the tiny space that is living
room, bedroom
and kitchen, Poonam echoed what
we heard from
several Sarvajal customers, as
she prepared
the family dinner, carefully
pouring the water
that's just as precious as her
staple rice.
WOMAN (through translator): In
the past, we
always suffered from upset
stomachs, frequently
running to the latrine. We had
to go long
distances to pick it up, and so
we would buy
water, and that was full of
chemicals. This
water is really good.
K.H. PATIL: People see what is
happening,
and with all that, now they are
getting educated.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And Minister
Patil says
governments at all levels are
starting to
respond to the drinking water
crisis.
The Karnataka government, for
example, has
commissioned 7,000 kiosks or
ATMs like this
one in a semirural area, pinning
high hopes
on technology and on private
companies that
run these facilities that will
have an incentive
to improve the notoriously
unreliable service.
For your incentive to keep the
thing running
properly is very plain to see.
You will lose
money if the system is down.
AMIT MISHRA: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Still, he
says, despite
many satisfied customers, growth
has been
slower than Sarvajal had
planned.
The politics are complicated, he
says, in
the world's most populous
democracy, even
for life's most basic necessity.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this
Fred de Sam Lazaro
in New Delhi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.
Now a "NewsHour" essay.
Chef Jacques Pepin arrived in
the United States
from France in 1959. He is the
author of the
widely cited French culinary
text book "La
Technique," the star of several
PBS cooking
shows, including one with his
friend and fellow
cook the late Julia Child.
Tonight, Pepin shares his idea
on the essence
of a recipe.
JACQUES PEPIN, Chef: For someone
who writes
recipes, there is a paradox
between the written
recipe and the creation of a
taste.
When writing a recipe, one
records a moment
in time which can never be
duplicated exactly
again. The paradox is that the
recipe tells
the reader, this must be done
this way, when,
in fact, to get the result
you're looking
for, the recipe has to be
modified each time.
The exact reproduction of a
taste, which is
what the making of a dish is,
only works when
the processes, timing, and
ingredients are
adjusted and changed to fit each
particular
situation.
There is a gap between the
step-by-step procedure
and the completed dish, just as
an artist
cannot equate the technical
process of painting
with the finished work of art.
Several years ago, I wrote a
recipe for pears
in caramel sauce. The idea was,
you peel the
pears, cut them in half, remove
the seeds,
sprinkle them with sugar, and
place them in
a very hot oven. Exposed to the
heat, the
juice of the pear seeps out,
combines with
the sugar and creates a caramel.
By then,
the pears are cooked.
Add cream to the caramel, and
the resulting
sauce is poured around the pear
in a serving
dish. As the sauce cools and
thickens, it
is finished with a bit of pear
brandy or cognac.
When I first created this
recipe, the pears
were done in 30 minutes. That
amount of time
only reflects the unique set of
circumstances
I faced, ripeness of the pear,
type of roasting
pan I used. This is what
happened on that
particular day.
The next time, I used pears that
were more
ripe, and they were done in 10
minutes. But
the liquid around hadn't yet
turned into a
caramel. So I removed the pears,
reduced the
liquid to a caramel, and
finished it with
cream.
The third time, I used Bosc
pears that were
very hard. No juice came out of
the pears.
The sugar started burning. So I
had to add
water to the pan to create a
caramel. The
pears needed almost an hour of
cooking, even
though my recipe said 30
minutes. Yet, at
the end, the three dishes looked
and taste
the same.
If the recipe had been followed
to the letter,
the finished dish would have
been a disaster,
but understanding the idea in
the platonic
sense behind the dish enables
the cook to
adjust and compensate for
ingredients, temperature,
humidity, et cetera.
So, what is the point of at
recipe? A recipe
is a teaching tool, a guide, a
point of departure.
You have to follow it exactly
the first time
you make the dish. But as you
make it again
and again, you will change it,
you will massage
it to fit your own taste, your
own sense of
aesthetic.
I have had dinner many times at
the home of
friends who cooked from one of
my cookbooks
and have often been amazed at
how far away
the dish has moved from the
original recipe.
But it is not necessarily a
negative experience.
In fact, it is sometimes better
than the original.
And I end up getting credit and
thanks for
a dish that has nothing to do
with me anymore.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now for our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you too.
President Obama hosted the sixth
annual White
House Science Fair today. There
were more
than 130 students from 30 states
in attendance.
Among the projects presented by
elementary,
middle and high school students,
a water-powered
generator, a prototype robot
that could help
clean subway tracks, and even a
student-designed,
3-D-printed bubble wand.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Have you tested out the bubble
wands?
STUDENT: Yes, sir.
BARACK OBAMA: Do they work?
BARACK OBAMA: Do you want to try
one?
STUDENT: Yes. Do you want to try
BARACK OBAMA: You want -- you
know what? What
do you think we get some bubbles
going on
right here?
You know what? Clearly, I am out
of practice.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK, we won't
comment on that.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: More than
70,000 people have taken our "Do
you live
in a bubble?" quiz designed by
conservative
Charles Murray. Our economics
correspondent,
Paul Solman, responds to some
criticism of
the quiz and he takes a closer
look at Murray's
personal evolution and the
effect of income
inequality in the United States.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: a business
professor who started
the viral trend of writing
financial advice
on index cards.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.